Connect VBUS to VBUS and GND to GND on the pair of RP2040 boards.

If you wanted to use two host PC's (one for each USB port) then the consideration becomes slightly more complex. ;)

Connecting them in parallel in this way ensures they both start at the exact same instant, rather than one of them backpowering the other through shared port pin connections.

and starting unreliably (or not at all)

laptop (batttery only)  to desktop obviates some concerns. ;)

I use an isolation transformer on a 120 VAC powered unit but that's just superstitiousness not well-researched (on my part) engineering practice.

I think if you fully understand the issue with regard to the use of a line powered oscilloscope the rest will fall into place for you.

In general, I prefer single-ended power flow where only one power source exists.

The same USB hub on a desktop PC doesn't worry me; they're both at 5 VDC and in the same chassis.

But I still bond VBUS to VBUS and GND to GND if I'm going to use USB (even occasionally) on both sides.

The original issue I had addressed was backpowering a SAMD21 board through the USART pins.  It surprised me, so I looked into it.

Simplest answer was to bond the USB power pins on both ends.  That solved it.

If you have a  preferred direction of power flow you can also toss in a schottky diode in the VBUS to VBUS connection.

(comment received)

They very strongly disrecommend cutting power or ground on any USB cable.

The one I was thinking about was when your project has its own source of 5 VDC.

And you're worried about backfeeding that source of 5 VDC into your host PC chassis.

(later)

something like this:

USB does not permit driving currents down the D+/D- data lines unless the 5V line is powered.

from:

(july 18, 2012 10:26 Yann Vernier)

https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/35885/proper-behavior-for-usb-and-5v

I've seen this referenced several times in some form and haven't quite sussed what's what.

'driving currents' sounds suspiciously vague/unsupported as an idea. ;)

But very basically it sounds to me like the device receiving power from a host PC looks for the presence of 5 VDC from VBUS, and if it doesn't find it, something wrong happens.

Obviously if your implementation works it works. ;)

But the general case seems to have that caveat; no unpowered USB connections that still make use of D+ and D- in the conventional manner.

The isolator chip solution starts to look quite attractive, for that instance.

(adafruit has such a breakout)

What I do is simpler: I distribute 5 VDC from a single entry point into my project (which leverages RPi4, STM32F407 Discovery and CP2104 USB to USART bridge).

Really never did adequately solve the two host PC problem. ;)

I keep CP2104 Friend and RPi Pico RP2040 bonded at VBUS and GND.  That works fine.

(and gives me USART access to RP2040 board via USB bridge CP2104)

(Two different projects; one is just a RP2040 with a CP2104; the other is as described)

The other solution to consider is the lower potential terminals of both RP2040's (after the diode that separates it from VBUS).

the pin deep in the corner of RP2040 is the one I use (VBUS).

So, pins 38 and 40 (GND, VBUS, respectively) on RPi Pico RP2040 USD $4 target.


This post (in the above URI) by Foxie (last post) seems 'urgent' and possibly correct in some/all details, where they mention:

"So it is absolutely essential that you have a schottky diode in series with Vbus"

I did that in my RPi4/STM32F407 Discovery project to protect the host PC from backfeeding power to its USB port. 

I also put in a schottky to prevent powering RPi4 from that same host PC's USB port, which it was doing (much to my surprise!) until I made the correction.

I'd cutoff the regular RPi4 power supply but the system didn't go down. ;)

The power path was: host PC USB > STM32F407 Discovery > RPi4 (pin header).

oops.

It was meant for the other direction (RPi4 pin header 5V > STM32F407 Discovery).

Normally that's all I need; but the USB was temporarily connected to the Discovery to reflash it.

Original concern documented here:

https://forums.adafruit.com/viewtopic.php?f=24&t=130242

(in practice the 10k resistors inline for the USART signals proved adequate)

fig 6.2 interesting:

http://www.ftdichip.com/Support/Documents/DataSheets/ICs/DS_FT232R.pdf

more here:

https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/55445/does-a-self-powered-usb-device-have-to-connect-to-vcc-from-the-host-port

"Therefore, the USB VBUS is an important "side-band" signal in USB connect protocol."

That seems like game, set and match, to me.

and this (same uri):

"For the same reason, the pullup resistor -- which both notifies a host that a device has been plugged in, and identifies its initial speed -- should be referenced to VBUS, not the device's local supply. –  Dave Tweed Jan 19 '13 at 1:27"

END.
